# Upgrading from rspec-rails-2.x to rspec-rails-3

For detailed information on the general RSpec 3.x upgrade process see the [RSpec
Upgrade docs](https://relishapp.com/rspec/docs/upgrade).

There are three particular `rspec-rails` specific changes to be aware of:

<a name="pending-migration-checks"></a>
## Rails 4.x `ActiveRecord::Migration` pending migration checks

If you are not using `ActiveRecord` you do not need to worry about these
settings.

Users of Rails 4.x can now take advantage of improved schema migration and sync
abilities. Prior to RSpec 3, users were required to manually run migrations in
both the development and test environments. Additionally, the behavior differed
depending on if the specs were run via `rake` or via the standalone `rspec`
command.

With the release of Rails 4, new APIs have been exposed on
`ActiveRecord::Migration`. This allows RSpec to take advantage of these new
standard migration checks, mirroring behavior across the board.

  - Rails 4.0.x

    Add the following to the top of the `rails_helper` file after Rails has
    been required:

    ```ruby
    ActiveRecord::Migration.check_pending!
    ```

    This will raise an exception if there are any pending schema changes. Users
    will still be required to manually keep the development and test
    environments in sync.

  - Rails 4.1+

    With this release there was an exciting new feature. Users no longer need
    to keep the development and test environments in sync. To take advantage of
    this add the following to the top of the `rails_helper` file after Rails
    has been required:

    ```ruby
    ActiveRecord::Migration.maintain_test_schema!
    ```

    What this does is that rather than just raising when the test schema has
    pending migrations, Rails will try to load the schema. An exception will
    now only be raised if there are pending migrations afterwards the schema
    has been loaded.

    There are a few things you still need to be aware of with this:
      - you still need to run the migrations manually, except now you just run
        them in your development environment
      - if you have not initialized the schema an exception will be raised
        stating you need to run `rake db:migrate` first

If you wish to opt-out of checking the pending migrations, you should set this
on the Rails side. To do this, add the following to your
`config/environments/test.rb` file:

```ruby
config.active_record.maintain_test_schema = false
```

New RSpec projects don't need to worry about these commands as the `rails
generate rspec:install` will add them for you.

<a name="file-type-inference-disabled"></a>
## File-type inference disabled by default

Previously we automatically inferred spec type from a file location, this
was a surprising behaviour for new users and undesirable for some veteran users
so from RSpec 3 onwards this behaviour must be explicitly opted into with:

```Ruby
RSpec.configure do |config|
  config.infer_spec_type_from_file_location!
end
```

This change was made to accomplish our general goals of acting with the principle
of least surprise and removing magic from RSpec. See [the directory structure
documentation](https://www.relishapp.com/rspec/rspec-rails/v/3-0/docs/directory-structure) for more details.

<a name="default-helper-files"></a>
## Default helper files created in RSpec 3.x have changed

In prior versions, only a single `spec_helper.rb` file was generated. This file
has been moved to `rails_helper.rb`. The new `spec_helper.rb` is the same
standard helper generated by running `rspec --init`.

This change was made to accomplish two general goals:

- Keep the installation process in sync with regular RSpec changes

- Provide an out-of-the-box way to avoid loading Rails for those specs that do
  not require it

<a name="generators"></a>
### Generators

Generators run in RSpec 3.x will require `rails_helper` and not `spec_helper`.

<a name="upgrading-an-existing-app"></a>
### Upgrading an Existing App

For most existing apps, one of the following upgrade paths is sufficient to
switch to the new helpers:

#### I need to move things over in stages

1. Create a new `rails_helper.rb` with the following content:

    ```ruby
    require 'spec_helper'
    ```

2. As necessary, replace `require 'spec_helper'` with `require 'rails_helper'`
   in the specs.

3. When ready, move any Rails specific code and setup from `spec_helper.rb` to
   `rails_helper.rb`.

#### I'm ready to just switch completely

1. Move the existing `spec_helper.rb` to `rails_helper.rb`:

    ```ruby
    git mv spec/spec_helper.rb spec/rails_helper.rb
    ```

2. Run the installation rake task opting to not replace `rails_helper.rb`:

    ```console
    $ bin/rails generate rspec:install
          create  .rspec
           exist  spec
          create  spec/spec_helper.rb
        conflict  spec/rails_helper.rb
    Overwrite my_app/spec/rails_helper.rb? (enter "h"for help) [Ynaqdh] n
            skip  spec/rails_helper.rb
    ```

3. Move any non-Rails RSpec configurations and customizations from your
   `rails_helper.rb` to `spec_helper.rb`.

4. Find/replace instances of `require 'spec_helper'` with
   `require 'rails_helper'` in any specs which rely on Rails.

# Upgrading from rspec-rails-1.x to rspec-rails-2

This is a work in progress. Please submit errata, missing steps, or patches to
the [rspec-rails issue tracker](https://github.com/rspec/rspec-rails/issues).

## Rake tasks

Delete lib/tasks/rspec.rake, if present. Rake tasks now live in the rspec-rails
gem.

## `spec_helper.rb`

There were a few changes to the generated `spec/spec_helper.rb` file. We
recommend the following:

1. set aside a copy of your existing `spec/spec_helper.rb` file.
2. run `rails generate rspec:install`
3. copy any customizations from your old spec_helper to the new one

If you prefer to make the changes manually in the existing spec_helper, here
is what you need to change:

    # rspec-1
    require 'spec/autorun'

    Spec::Runner.configure do |config|
      ...
    end

    # rspec-2
    require 'rspec/rails'

    RSpec.configure do |config|
      ...
    end

## Controller specs

### isolation from view templates

By default, controller specs do _not_ render view templates. This keeps
controller specs isolated from the content of views and their requirements.

NOTE that the template must exist, but it will not be rendered.  This is
different from rspec-rails-1.x, in which the template didn't need to exist, but
ActionController makes a number of new decisions in Rails 3 based on the
existence of the template. To keep the RSpec code free of monkey patches, and
to keep the rspec user experience simpler, we decided that this would be a fair
trade-off.

### `response.should render_template`

This needs to move from before the action to after. For example:

    # rspec-rails-1
    controller.should render_template("edit")
    get :edit, :id => "37"

    # rspec-rails-2
    get :edit, :id => "37"
    response.should render_template("edit")

    # rspec-rails-2 with expect syntax
    get :edit, :id => "37"
    expect(response).to render_template("edit")

rspec-1 had to monkey patch Rails to get render_template to work before the
action, and this broke a couple of times with Rails releases (requiring urgent
fix releases in RSpec). Part of the philosophy of rspec-rails-2 is to rely on
public APIs in Rails as much as possible. In this case, `render_template`
delegates directly to Rails' `assert_template`, which only works after the
action.

## View specs

### `view.should render_template`

Rails changed the way it renders partials, so to set an expectation that a
partial gets rendered, you need

    render
    view.should render_template(:partial => "widget/_row")

### stub_template

Introduced in rspec-rails-2.2, simulates the presence of view templates on the
file system. This supports isolation from partials rendered by the vew template
that is the subject of a view example:

    stub_template "widgets/_widget.html.erb" => "This Content"

### No more `have_tag` or `have_text`

Before Webrat came along, rspec-rails had its own `have_tag` and `have_text`
matchers that wrapped Rails' `assert_select`. Webrat included replacements for
these methods, as well as new matchers (`have_selector` and `have_xpath`), all
of which rely on Nokogiri to do its work, and are far less brittle than RSpec's
`have_tag`.

Capybara has similar matchers, which will soon be available view specs (they
are already available in controller specs with `render_views`).

Given the brittleness of RSpec's `have_tag` and `have_text` matchers and the
presence of new Webrat and Capybara matchers that do a better job, `have_tag`
and `have_text` were not included in rspec-rails-2.

## Mocks, stubs, doubles

### as_new_record

Earlier versions of the view generators generated stub_model with `:new_record?
=> true`. That is no longer recognized in rspec-rails-2, so you need to change
this:

    stub_model(Widget, :new_record? => true)

to this:

    stub_model(Widget).as_new_record

Generators in 2.0.0 final release will do the latter.
